feat: add DWO documentation (#2930)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/administration-guide/pages/devworkspace-operator.adoc

:page-aliases: .:devworkspace-operator.adoc

[id="devworkspace-operator"]
= {devworkspace} Operator overview

> The {devworkspace} Operator (DWO) is a dependency of {prod-short}, and is an integral part of how {prod-short} functions. To summarize, one of DWO's main responsibilities is to reconcile {devworkspace} custom resources (CR).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {devworkspace} Operator (DWO) is a dependency of {prod-short}, and is an integral part of how {prod-short} functions. One of DWO's main responsibilities is to reconcile {devworkspace} custom resources (CR).
```

> The {devworkspace} CR is a {orch-name} resource representation of a {prod-short} workspace. Whenever a user creates a workspace using the {prod-short} Dashboard, {prod-short} will create a {devworkspace} CR in the cluster under the hood. For every {prod-short} workspace, there is an underlying {devworkspace} CR on the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {devworkspace} CR is a {orch-name} resource representation of a {prod-short} workspace. Whenever a user creates a workspace using the {prod-short} In the background, Dashboard {prod-short} creates a {devworkspace} CR in the cluster. For every {prod-short} workspace, there is an underlying {devworkspace} CR on the cluster.
```

Figure 1 shows an example of a {devworkspace} CR in a cluster:

.Example of a {devworkspace} CR in a cluster
image::devworkspace-operator/devworkspace-cr-example.png[DevWorkspace CR example,width=624,height=465]

> When creating a workspace with {prod-short} with a devfile, the {devworkspace} CR will contain the devfile details. Additionally, {prod-short} will add the editor definition into the {devworkspace} CR depending on which editor was chosen for the workspace. {prod-short} will also add attributes to the {devworkspace} which further configures the workspace depending on how the CheCluster CR was configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating a workspace with {prod-short} with a devfile, the {devworkspace} CR contains the devfile details. Additionally, {prod-short} adds the editor definition into the {devworkspace} CR depending on which editor was chosen for the workspace. {prod-short} will also add attributes to the {devworkspace} which further configures the workspace depending on how you configured the `CheCluster` CR.
```

> A DevWorkspaceTemplate is a custom resource that defines a reusable `spec.template` for {devworkspace}s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `DevWorkspaceTemplate` is a custom resource that defines a reusable `spec.template` for {devworkspace}s.
```

> When a workspace is started, DWO will read the corresponding {devworkspace} CR and create a workspace pod running the container(s) defined in the devfile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a workspace is started, DWO reads the corresponding {devworkspace} CR and creates a workspace pod running the container(s) defined in the devfile.
```

.Custom Resources overview

> Following Custom Resource Definitions are provided by the {devworkspace} Operator:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following Custom Resource Definitions are provided by the {devworkspace} Operator:
```

* {devworkspace}
* DevWorkspaceTemplate
* DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig

> * DevWorkspaceRouting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `{devworkspace}`
* `DevWorkspaceTemplate`
* `DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig`
* `DevWorkspaceRouting`
```

.{devworkspace}

> The {devworkspace} custom resource contains details about an {prod-short} workspace. Notably, it will contain devfile details and a reference to the editor definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {devworkspace} custom resource contains details about an {prod-short} workspace. Notably, it contains devfile details and a reference to the editor definition.
```

.DevWorkspaceTemplate

> In {prod-short} the DevWorkspaceTemplate custom resource is typically used to define an editor (such as Visual Studio Code) for {prod-short} workspaces. This custom resource can be used to define reusable `spec.template` content that is reused by multiple {devworkspace}s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In {prod-short} the `DevWorkspaceTemplate` custom resource is typically used to define an editor (such as Visual Studio Code - Open Source) for {prod-short} workspaces. You can use this custom resource to define reusable `spec.template` content that is reused by multiple {devworkspace}s.
```

.DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig

> The DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig (DWOC) custom resource defines configuration options for the DWO. There are two different types of DWOC, a global config and a non-global config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig` (DWOC) custom resource defines configuration options for the DWO. There are two different types of DWOC:

 * global configuration
 * non-global configuration
```

> The global config is a DWOC custom resource named `devworkspace-operator-config` and is expected to be located in the DWO installation namespace. By default the global config is not created upon installation. Configuration fields set in the global configuration will apply to the DWO and all {devworkspace}s, however the DWOC configuration can be overridden by a non-global config.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The global config is a DWOC custom resource named `devworkspace-operator-config` and is expected to be located in the DWO installation namespace. By default, the global config is not created upon installation. Configuration fields set in the global configuration will apply to the DWO and all {devworkspace}s; however, the DWOC configuration can be overridden by a non-global config.
```

> The global config is a DWOC custom resource named `devworkspace-operator-config` and is expected to be located in the DWO installation namespace. By default the global config is not created upon installation. Configuration fields set in the global configuration will apply to the DWO and all {devworkspace}s, however the DWOC configuration can be overridden by a non-global config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The global configuration is a DWOC custom resource named `devworkspace-operator-config` and is usually located in the DWO installation namespace. By default, the global configuration is not created upon installation. Configuration fields set in the global configuration will apply to the DWO and all {devworkspace}s. However, the DWOC configuration can be overridden by a non-global configuration.
```

Author: Fixed with commit: c6ad2d23fdb44bacfcebcbeb1df778ad393e8f5b

> In contrast, any DWOC custom resource that is not the global config is considered to be non-global config. A non-global config will not apply to any {devworkspace}s unless the {devworkspace} contains a reference to the DWOC. If the global config and non-global config have the same fields, the non-global config field will take precedence.

Reviewer 2: This sentence sounds a bit confusing. I suggest rephrasing it:

```suggestion
In contrast, any other DWOC custom resource not satisfying abovementioned criteria for global configuration is considered a non-global configuration. These non-global configurations will not apply to any {devworkspace}s unless the {devworkspace} contains a reference to them. When both a global and non-global configuration define the same fields, the non-global configuration's field will take precedence.
```

> In contrast, any DWOC custom resource that is not the global config is considered to be non-global config. A non-global config will not apply to any {devworkspace}s unless the {devworkspace} contains a reference to the DWOC. If the global config and non-global config have the same fields, the non-global config field will take precedence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any other DWOC custom resource than `devworkspace-operator-config` is considered to be non-global configuration. A non-global configuration does not apply to any {devworkspace}s unless the {devworkspace} contains a reference to the DWOC. If the global configuration and non-global configuration have the same fields, the non-global configuration field takes precedence.
```

Author: Fixed with commit: c6ad2d23fdb44bacfcebcbeb1df778ad393e8f5b

.Global DWOC and {prod-short}-owned DWOC comparison
[cols="1,1,1",options="header"]
|===
| |Global DWOC |{prod-short}-owned DWOC
|Resource name |`devworkspace-operator-config` |`devworkspace-config`
|Namespace |DWO installation namespace |{prod-short} installation namespace
|Default creation |Not created by default upon DWO installation |Created by default on {prod-short} installation
|Scope |Applies to the DWO itself and all {devworkspace}s managed by DWO |Applies to {devworkspace}s created by {prod-short}
|Precedence |Overridden by fields set in {prod-short}-owned config |Takes precedence over global config if both define the same field
|Primary use case |Used to define default, broad settings that apply to DWO in general. |Used to define specific configuration for {devworkspace}s created by {prod-short}
|===

> For example, by default {prod-short} creates and manages a non-global DWOC in the {prod-short} namespace named `devworkspace-config`. This DWOC contains configuration specific to {prod-short} workspaces, and is maintained by {prod-short} depending on how the CheCluster CR is configured. When {prod-short} creates a workspace, {prod-short} will add a reference to the {prod-short}-owned DWOC via the `controller.devfile.io/devworkspace-config` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, by default {prod-short} creates and manages a non-global DWOC in the {prod-short} namespace named `devworkspace-config`. This DWOC contains configuration specific to {prod-short} workspaces, and is maintained by {prod-short} depending on how you configure the CheCluster CR. When {prod-short} creates a workspace, {prod-short} adds a reference to the {prod-short}-owned DWOC with the `controller.devfile.io/devworkspace-config` attribute.
```

.Example of {devworkspace} configuration attribute
image::devworkspace-operator/devworkspace-config-attribute.png[DevWorkspace config attribute example,width=624,height=280]

.DevWorkspaceRouting

> The DevWorkspaceRouting custom resource defines details about the endpoints of a {devworkspace}. Every {devworkspace} will have its corresponding DevWorkspaceRouting object that specifies the workspace's container endpoints. Endpoints defined from the devfile, as well as endpoints defined by the editor definition will appear in the DevWorkspaceRouting custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DevWorkspaceRouting` custom resource defines details about the endpoints of a {devworkspace}. Every {devworkspace} has its corresponding `DevWorkspaceRouting` object that specifies the workspace's container endpoints. Endpoints defined from the devfile, as well as endpoints defined by the editor definition appear in the `DevWorkspaceRouting` custom resource.
```

Author: Fixed with commit: c6ad2d23fdb44bacfcebcbeb1df778ad393e8f5b

> The DevWorkspaceRouting custom resource defines details about the endpoints of a {devworkspace}. Every {devworkspace} will have its corresponding DevWorkspaceRouting object that specifies the workspace's container endpoints. Endpoints defined from the devfile, as well as endpoints defined by the editor definition will appear in the DevWorkspaceRouting custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DevWorkspaceRouting` custom resource defines details about the endpoints of a {devworkspace}. Every {devworkspace} will have its corresponding `DevWorkspaceRouting` object that specifies the workspace's container endpoints. Endpoints defined from the devfile, as well as endpoints defined by the editor definition will appear in the `DevWorkspaceRouting` custom resource.
```

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: controller.devfile.io/v1alpha1
kind: DevWorkspaceRouting
metadata:
  annotations:
    controller.devfile.io/devworkspace-started: 'false'
  name: routing-workspaceb14aa33254674065
  labels:
    controller.devfile.io/devworkspace_id: workspaceb14aa33254674065
spec:
  devworkspaceId: workspaceb14aa33254674065
  endpoints:
    universal-developer-image:
      - attributes:
          cookiesAuthEnabled: true
          discoverable: false
          type: main
          urlRewriteSupported: true
        exposure: public
        name: che-code
        protocol: https
        secure: true
        targetPort: 3100
  podSelector:
    controller.devfile.io/devworkspace_id: workspaceb14aa33254674065
  routingClass: che
status:
  exposedEndpoints:
    ...
----

.{devworkspace} Operator's operands

> The {devworkspace} Operator has two operands, the controller deployment and the webhook deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {devworkspace} Operator has two operands:

* controller deployment
* webhook deployment.
```

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get pods -l 'app.kubernetes.io/part-of=devworkspace-operator' -o custom-columns=NAME:.metadata.name -n openshift-operators
NAME
devworkspace-controller-manager-66c6f674f5-l7rhj <1>
devworkspace-webhook-server-d4958d9cd-gh7vr <2>
devworkspace-webhook-server-d4958d9cd-rfvj6 <2>
----

<1> The {devworkspace} controller pod, which is responsible for reconciling custom resources
<2> The {devworkspace} operator webhook server pods

> === Configuring the {devworkspace}-controller-manager deployment

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be `h2` ?
```suggestion
== Configuring the {devworkspace}-controller-manager deployment
```

Author: Yes, it should be h2, @deerskindoll 's suggestion fixes it (it seems we cannot use `==`, we must use `.`)

Reviewer: technically, `==` works too but `.` is simpler

> === Configuring the {devworkspace}-controller-manager deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Configuring the {devworkspace}-controller-manager deployment
```

> The `devworkspace-controller-manager` pod can be configured in the {devworkspace} Operator Subscription object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure the `devworkspace-controller-manager` pod in the {devworkspace} Operator Subscription object:
```

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Subscription
metadata:
  name: devworkspace-operator
  namespace: openshift-operators
spec:
  config:
    affinity:
      nodeAffinity: ...
      podAffinity: ...
    resources:
      limits:
        memory: ...
        cpu: ...
      requests:
        memory: ...
        cpu: ...
----

> More details on configuration can be found in this link:https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager/blob/master/doc/design/subscription-config.md[documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn more about configuration in this link:https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager/blob/master/doc/design/subscription-config.md[documentation].
```

> === Configuring the {devworkspace}-webhook-server deployment

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be `h2` ?
```suggestion
== Configuring the {devworkspace}-webhook-server deployment
```

Author: Yes, it should be h2, @deerskindoll 's suggestion fixes it (it seems we cannot use `==`, we must use `.`)

> === Configuring the {devworkspace}-webhook-server deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Configuring the {devworkspace}-webhook-server deployment
```

> === Configuring the {devworkspace}-webhook-server deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Configuring the {devworkspace}-webhook-server deployment
```

> The `devworkspace-webhook-server` deployment can be configured in the global DWOC:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure the `devworkspace-webhook-server` deployment in the global DWOC:
```

[id="devworkspace-operator"]

> = {devworkspace} operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= {devworkspace} Operator overview
```

> == What is the {devworkspace} Operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Figure 1 shows an example of a {devworkspace} CR in a cluster:

.Example of a {devworkspace} CR in a cluster
image::devworkspace-operator/devworkspace-cr-example.png[DevWorkspace CR example,width=624,height=465]

When creating a workspace with {prod-short} with a devfile, the {devworkspace} CR will contain the devfile details. Additionally, {prod-short} will add the editor definition into the {devworkspace} CR depending on which editor was chosen for the workspace. {prod-short} will also add attributes to the {devworkspace} which further configures the workspace depending on how the CheCluster CR was configured.

A DevWorkspaceTemplate is a custom resource that defines a reusable `spec.template` for {devworkspace}s.

When a workspace is started, DWO will read the corresponding {devworkspace} CR and create a workspace pod running the container(s) defined in the devfile.

> == Custom Resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Custom Resources overview
```

> Here are the following Custom Resource Definitions provided by the {devworkspace} Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following Custom Resource Definitions are provided by the {devworkspace} Operator:

* {devworkspace}
* DevWorkspaceTemplate
* DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig
* DevWorkspaceRouting

```

> === {devworkspace}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.{devworkspace}
```

> The {devworkspace} custom resource contains details about an {prod-short} workspace. Notably, it will contain devfile details and a reference to the editor definition. See <<What is {devworkspace} operator>> for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The {devworkspace} custom resource contains details about an {prod-short} workspace. Notably, it will contain devfile details and a reference to the editor definition.
```

> === DevWorkspaceTemplate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.DevWorkspaceTemplate
```

In {prod-short} the DevWorkspaceTemplate custom resource is typically used to define an editor (such as Visual Studio Code) for {prod-short} workspaces. This custom resource can be used to define reusable `spec.template` content that is reused by multiple {devworkspace}s.

> === DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig
```

The DevWorkspaceOperatorConfig (DWOC) custom resource defines configuration options for the DWO. There are two different types of DWOC, a global config and a non-global config.

The global config is a DWOC custom resource named `devworkspace-operator-config` and is expected to be located in the DWO installation namespace. By default the global config is not created upon installation. Configuration fields set in the global configuration will apply to the DWO and all {devworkspace}s, however the DWOC configuration can be overridden by a non-global config.

In contrast, any DWOC custom resource that is not the global config is considered to be non-global config. A non-global config will not apply to any {devworkspace}s unless the {devworkspace} contains a reference to the DWOC. If the global config and non-global config have the same fields, the non-global config field will take precedence.

> .Global DWOC vs {prod-short}-owned DWOC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Global DWOC and {prod-short}-owned DWOC comparison
```

|Default creation |Not created by default upon DWO installation |Created by default on {prod-short} installation
|Scope |Applies to the DWO itself and all {devworkspace}s managed by DWO |Applies to {devworkspace}s created by {prod-short}
|Precedence |Overridden by fields set in {prod-short}-owned config |Takes precedence over global config if both define the same field
|Primary use case |Used to define default, broad settings that apply to DWO in general. |Used to define specific configuration for {devworkspace}s created by {prod-short}
|===

For example, by default {prod-short} creates and manages a non-global DWOC in the {prod-short} namespace named `devworkspace-config`. This DWOC contains configuration specific to {prod-short} workspaces, and is maintained by {prod-short} depending on how the CheCluster CR is configured. When {prod-short} creates a workspace, {prod-short} will add a reference to the {prod-short}-owned DWOC via the `controller.devfile.io/devworkspace-config` attribute.

.Example of {devworkspace} configuration attribute
image::devworkspace-operator/devworkspace-config-attribute.png[DevWorkspace config attribute example,width=624,height=280]

> === DevWorkspaceRouting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.DevWorkspaceRouting
```

The DevWorkspaceRouting custom resource defines details about the endpoints of a {devworkspace}. Every {devworkspace} will have its corresponding DevWorkspaceRouting object that specifies the workspace's container endpoints. Endpoints defined from the devfile, as well as endpoints defined by the editor definition will appear in the DevWorkspaceRouting custom resource.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: controller.devfile.io/v1alpha1
kind: DevWorkspaceRouting
metadata:
  annotations:
    controller.devfile.io/devworkspace-started: 'false'
  name: routing-workspaceb14aa33254674065
  labels:
    controller.devfile.io/devworkspace_id: workspaceb14aa33254674065
spec:
  devworkspaceId: workspaceb14aa33254674065
  endpoints:
    universal-developer-image:
      - attributes:
          cookiesAuthEnabled: true
          discoverable: false
          type: main
          urlRewriteSupported: true
        exposure: public
        name: che-code
        protocol: https
        secure: true
        targetPort: 3100
  podSelector:
    controller.devfile.io/devworkspace_id: workspaceb14aa33254674065
  routingClass: che
status:
  exposedEndpoints:
    ...
----

> == {devworkspace} Operator's operands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.{devworkspace} Operator's operands
```
